add metrics page (#32)
stateless-consensus/eth-stateless-book: src/development/metrics.md

# Metrics

This page gather all the measurement metrics, so that we can easily refer to them in the future. It is broken into four parts:

 - The measurements that are common to both verkle and binary trees
 - The measurements that are specific to verkle trees
 - The measurements that are specific to binary trees

>  - The measurements that are specific to state expiry

Reviewer: - I'd remove or try to dedupe "The measurements" into the previous sentence.
- We usually use capitals for tree names (e.g., Verkle Trees)
- We still have pending even the chapter on State Expiry, so maybe I'd suggest removing the last bullet, or maybe add an extra "(Soon..)

This is a living document, that we will fill as questions arise and we gather more data.

> ##  Common measurements

Author: @jsign I assume that your "group types" measurements can go in there

Reviewer: I lean more into having separate pages under a sub-chapter.

If we don't do that, we can end up with an incredibly long page with numbers that make it hard for people to see what they're looking for.

I'd suggest your report is a sub-page, and mine a separate one.

> ### Execution performance

Reviewer: Can you add a quick sentence on what is the intention of this sub-section?

> #### impact of key hashing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Impact of key hashing
```

> In order to estimate the performance impact of Pedersen key hashing, this is a comparison of how long it takes to replay 200k blocks using Pedersen hashes, vs. sha256:

Reviewer: Can we add which network is the one used for the measurements? (mainnet, holesky, etc) and around which block numbers?

> In order to estimate the performance impact of Pedersen key hashing, this is a comparison of how long it takes to replay 200k blocks using Pedersen hashes, vs. sha256:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Verkle Trees, in order to estimate the performance impact of Pedersen hashing impact on performance, this is a comparison of how long it takes to replay 200k blocks against SHA256:
```

I'd suggest uppercase SHA256 for the rest of the doc too.

![image.png](./assets/hash_speed_diff.png)

> At the end of the sha256 run, so >200k blocks later, the chain was 75072 blocks ahead. This represents a loss of 3 hours per day against sha256. That’s >12% faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the end of the sha256 run, so >200k blocks later, the chain was 75072 blocks ahead. This represents a loss of 3 hours per day against sha256. That’s ~12% faster.
```
`>` sounds too vague.

> Coupled to the fact that Pedersen hashes aren’t quantum resistant, it seems like a good idea to reconsider using Pedersen hashes to compute trees.

Reviewer: Maybe it is worth mentioning what is the impact of changing to SHA256 for SNARK proving.

Author: do you remember those numbers?

Reviewer: The latest measurements were for BLAKE3 and KECCAK.

I think we can just add: "On the other hand, adding new hash functions could increase the complexity of future chain SNARKification efforts" or similar. If the actual proposal was Poseidon2 or something like that, prob would be an exception.

> ## Verkle-specific measurements

Reviewer: BTW, I think the previous part should actually be part of this section since you're trying to measure Pedersen hashes which is VKT related.

### Context

This data is gathered replaying ~200k historical blocks around the Shanghai fork. While they do not give a perfect view of how execution will behave once EIP-4762 is active, it still gives a good indication of what to expect, and how the spec should evolve.

### Witnesses

> 

Reviewer: Add some quick sentence on what this section is about.
Example: "This sections explores multiple dimensions of execution witnesses."

#### Size

> Research has been conducted, in order to determine the best structure for a witness. We tried three methods:

Reviewer: It mentions there're "three methods" but I see four bullet points?
I also think interleaving bullet points with images is hard to read.

I'd suggest saying: "Three witness encoding formats where explored, which are described below."

Then:
**Type 0**
Specified in the [current version of the consensus spec](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/_features/eip6800/beacon-chain.md#executionwitness), referred to as **type 0**. This approach ...

**Type 1 serialization container**
(Python def...)
 A first variation of the spec, in which prestate val....

**Type 2 serialization container**
(Python def...)
A second variation of the spec, in which update....

etc

```
Type 1 serialization container

 * A second variation of the spec, in which updates, insertions and reads are grouped in their own separate lists. The suffixes for each of these lists are also grouped as their own byte lists. This is referred to as **type 2**.

```python
class SuffixStateDiffs(Container):
    updated_suffixes: bytes
    updated_currents: List[Bytes32]
    updated_news: List[Bytes32]

    inserted_suffixes: bytes
    inserted_news: List[Bytes32]

    read_suffixes: bytes
    read_currents: List[Bytes32]

    missing_suffixes: bytes
```
Type 2 serialization container

 * A final variation, where update, reads, inserts and proof-of-absences are grouped, along with their suffixes, into their own lists. This is referred to as **type 3**.

```python
class UpdateDiff(Container):
    suffix: byte
    current: Bytes32
    new: Bytes32

class ReadDiff(Container):
    suffix: byte
    current: Bytes32

class InsertDiff(Container):
    suffix: byte
    new: Bytes32

class MissingDiff(Container):
    suffix byte

class StemStateDiff(Container):
    stem: Bytes31

    updates: List[UpdateDiff]
    reads: List[ReadStateDiff]
    insert: List[InsertStateDiff]

>     # TODO: check if this encodes as well as bytes

Author: probably not, I'll remove it

    missing: List[MissingStateDiff]

> ```

Author: I get the clarity point, but we are comparing different version - so I think we should leave it here for clarity. We could move the "final" version to its own file, but I think we should wait for a decision. So far, version 0 is the official one, and it's not on this page.

> Type 3 serialization container

Author: type 3 is the stuff above, did you mean you expected it below?

> Type 3 serialization container

Reviewer 2: Agree. MB. 

Yes, would definitely expect it below instead of over. In any case not a big deal. I just got confused when reading the non-rendered version.

Looks fine when rendered.

> Here are our findings after replaying data for 200k blocks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are our findings after replaying data:
```
I'd suggest this deletion since it was already explained in the context.

> ![image.png](./assets/total.png)

Reviewer: What does `during/post-transition` means?
Does this mean that the witnesses are partial since the tree conversion is running?

Author: yeah, a lot of the `CurrentValue`s are `null`

Author: they are useful for sync, potentially. So that's why I wanted to see what the impact on the witness during the transition was.

One can see that the spec is much less efficient than the other types. This is due to the inefficiency of storing `Optional[T]`. As a result, we didn’t include this method in the rest of the analysis.

> When only considering the post-transition witnesses, this is what is found:

Reviewer: I'd clarify what "post-transition" means since readers might not understand it's refering to the tree conversion. (I usually like using "tree conversion" no "post-transition" since sounds simpler, but no strong opinions)

![image.png](./assets/compare_post_transition.png)

> The maximum and minimum sizes for each type, are summarized in the following table:

Reviewer: Uhm, the "minimum" doesn't seem to be the same opposite definition as "maximum", right?
Should say "minimum (without outliers)"? Since the minimum of all cases is close to 0?

Author: clarified to "minimum observed"

|Name|Min (KB)|Max (KB)|
|-|-|-|
|type 1|425|1285|
|type 2|383|928|
|type3|380|928|

While type 2 and type 3 are quite close, one can see that type 3 has better average and minimum sizes.

#### Witness size breakdown (type 3)

Replaying past blocks, we generated the witnesses and could provide the following size breakdown for type 3 witnesses. This is averaged over ~134k blocks, as the conversion blocks were skipped.

|Component|avg size %|min size %|max size %|
|-|-|-|-|
|keys|13|9|49|
|pre-values|78|7|85|
|post-values|0.1|0|47|
|verkle proof|12|8|77|

#### Takeaways

The key takeaways are:

>  * Type 3 witnesses offer a great compression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Type 3 witnesses offer a great compression.
```

>  * post-values are of dubious use, and can not be verified without block execution. Although they don’t take much space on average, we suggest dropping them from the witness.

Reviewer: This doesn't seem to be a conclusion of the measurements, so I'm not sure it is a fair takeaway of the data analysis.

If you want to still say this somehow I would reorder a bit your sentence:
- Although post-state values don't take much space on average, there're active discussions in dropping them anyway since they have limited value.

### Database

Looking at a fully converted database (conversion + ~134k blocks replayed), we found that the leaf depths could be broken into :

|Depth|Count|Percentage|
|-|-|-|
|4|745822024|80.6|
|5|178484052|19.3|
|6|775718|0.1|
|7|2880|0|
|8|10|0|

### Gas usage

## Binary-specific measurements

> ## State expiry-specific measurements

Reviewer: I would suggest removing sections without information since they're confusing for readers.

If this is set as a reminder, we should create these as issues in our internal tracking for this project.
